What does "stateless" mean here: "These can be called independently and are stateless, as utility methods should be"?


Integrate these suggestions to further improve the tests and validators for edge cases and future extensibility:

⸻

1. Suggested Edge Case Tests

• Duplicate Detection:
Add tests that intentionally insert duplicate records (same bridge_id and timestamp) and validate that the validator identifies and reports them.
Why? Duplicates can cause overfitting or misleading statistics.

• Unusual but Valid Timestamps:
Test leap seconds, leap years, and mid-century dates, as well as mixed timezone offsets in ts_utc.
Why? Real-world time data is messy; this ensures resilience.

• All-Missing or All-NaN Features:
Add a test with all numeric features as nil, NaN, or infinite in a single batch to ensure errors are clear and not lost in aggregation.

• High Cardinality:
Test with thousands of unique bridge IDs or unexpected categorical values to verify performance and error messaging.

• Precision Loss:
Test features and output where floating-point rounding or precision loss could occur (e.g., values very near the edge of valid ranges) to ensure they're handled or flagged.

• Non-default Horizons:
Pass features with odd or non-standard horizons (e.g., 2, 4, 7, 11 min) to confirm horizon coverage is flexible and yields actionable warnings.

⸻

2. Validator Extensibility Enhancements

• Customizable Thresholds Per Bridge/Feature:
Allow the configuration of range and outlier thresholds on a per-bridge or per-feature basis (not just global), and test that they apply correctly.

• Async/Parallel Validation:
Add (and test) async validation for large datasets to avoid bottlenecks in the main thread.

• Pluggable Custom Validators:
You already have a plugin manager; add tests for registering, configuring, and running custom validators at runtime (e.g., via local config or remote API).

• Explainability Hooks:
Ensure every validator provides not only pass/fail/error, but also “why” (inputs, thresholds, statistics involved). Test that this info is present and clear for all custom and built-in validators.

• Validator Ordering/Priority:
Test that validator execution order (by priority) is respected, and failures in early, critical validators can short-circuit or skip subsequent lower-priority ones if desired.

⸻

3. Test Infrastructure Improvements

• Fuzz Testing:
Randomly generate probe ticks and feature vectors with combinations of valid/invalid/missing values to find unanticipated edge cases.

• Golden Data Versioning:
Store and test against multiple golden datasets (e.g., v1, v2, “legacy”, “production”) to ensure backward compatibility and early detection of validation drift.

• Partial Failure Simulation:
Test and verify system behavior when only a subset of records (e.g., a single bridge, or a single hour) fail validation. Ensure messages are targeted.

• Snapshot/Diff Testing:
For actionable feedback (summary/detailedSummary), implement assertions that changes to validator logic do not unintentionally change error/warning output, unless explicitly intended.

⸻

4. Future-Proofing for Data Drift and Feature Expansion

• Unknown/New Features:
Add tests to verify that the system gracefully ignores or warns about unknown fields, supporting forward compatibility with new features.

• Data Drift Reporting:
Test the integration of statistics output (mean, stdev, min/max trends) and ensure that drift from baseline (golden) is clearly flagged and actionable.

⸻

Example: Adding a Duplicate Record Test
@Test("Duplicate probe ticks should be detected and reported")
mutating func duplicateRecordDetection() async throws {
  try await setUp()
  guard !goldenSampleTicks.isEmpty else { return }
  var dupTicks = goldenSampleTicks
  // Add a duplicate of the first tick
  dupTicks.append(goldenSampleTicks[0])

  let result = validationService.validate(ticks: dupTicks)

  #expect(result.errors.contains { $0.contains("Duplicate record") })
}

